     'Why?'      'Because,' replied  the foreigner and  frowned  up at  the sky  where, sensing the oncoming cool of the evening, the  birds were flying to roost, ' Anna has already  bought  the sunflower-seed oil, in fact she has  not  only bought it, but has already spilled it. So that meeting will not take place.'      With this,  as  one might imagine, there was silence  beneath  the lime trees.      'Excuse  me,'  said  Berlioz  after a  pause  with  a  glance  at  the stranger's jaunty beret, ' but what on  earth has  sunflower-seed oil got to do with it... and who is Anna? '      'I'll tell you what sunflower-seed  oil's  got  to  do  with it,' said Bezdomny  suddenly,  having  obviously  decided  to  declare  war  on  their uninvited  companion. ' Have you, citizen, ever had to spend  any time in  a mental hospital? '      'Ivan! ' hissed Mikhail Alexandrovich.      But  the stranger was not  in the least offended  and  gave a  cheerful laugh. '  Yes, I have, I have,  and more than once! ' he exclaimed laughing, though the  stare that he  gave the poet  was  mirthless. ' Where haven't  I been! My only regret is that I didn't stay  long enough to ask the professor what  schizophrenia  was.  But  you  are  going  to find that  out  from him yourself, Ivan Nikolayich!'      'How do you know my name? '      'My  dear  fellow, who doesn't  know you?  '  With this the  foreigner pulled the previous day's  issue of  The Literary Gazette  out of his pocket and Ivan Nikolayich saw his own  picture on the front page above some of his own verse. Suddenly what had delighted  him  yesterday  as proof of his fame and popularity no longer gave the poet any pleasure at all.      'I beg your pardon,' he said,  his face darkening. ' Would  you excuse us for a minute? I should like a word or two with my friend.'      'Oh, with  pleasure!  ' exclaimed  the stranger. ' It's so delightful sitting here under the trees and I'm  not in a hurry to  go anywhere,  as it happens.'      'Look  here, Misha,'  whispered the  poet  when he had drawn  Berlioz aside.  ' He's not just a foreign tourist, he's a spy. He's a Russian emigre and he's trying to catch  us  out. Ask him for his papers  and then he'll go away . . .'      'Do you  think  we should? ' whispered Berlioz anxiously,  thinking to himself--' He's right, of course . . .'      'Mark my words,' the poet whispered to him. ' He's pretending to be an idiot so that he can trap us with some  compromising  question. You can hear how he speaks Russian,' said the poet, glancing sideways and watching to see that the stranger was  not eavesdropping. '  Come on,  let's arrest  him and then we'll get rid of him.'      The poet led Berlioz by the arm back to the bench.      The unknown  man  was no longer sitting on it  but standing  beside it, holding a booklet in a dark grey binding, a fat envelope made of good  paper and a visiting card.      'Forgive  me, but in  the  heat of our argument I forgot  to introduce myself.  Here is my  card, my passport and  a letter inviting  me to come to Moscow for consultations,' said the stranger gravely, giving both writers  a piercing stare.      The  two men were embarrassed. ' Hell, he overheard us .  . . ' thought Berlioz, indicating with a polite gesture that  there  was no need  for this show of documents. Whilst the stranger was  offering them to the editor, the poet managed to catch sight of the visiting card. On it in foreign lettering was the word '  Professor ' and  the initial letter of a surname which began with a'W'.      'Delighted,' muttered  the  editor awkwardly as  the foreigner put his papers  back into his pocket. Good relations having been re-established, all three sat down again on the bench.      'So you've been invited here as a consultant, have  you,  professor? ' asked Berlioz.      'Yes, I have.'      'Are you German? ' enquired Bezdomny. 
     'I? '  rejoined  the professor and  thought for  a  moment.  ' Yes, I suppose I am German. . . . ' he said.      'You speak excellent Russian,' remarked Bezdomny.      'Oh, I'm something of a polyglot. I know a great number of languages,' replied the professor.      'And what is your particular field of work? ' asked Berlioz.      'I specialise in black magic.'      'Like hell you do! . . . ' thought Mikhail Alexandrovich.      'And ... and you've been  invited here to give advice  on  that? ' he asked with a gulp.      'Yes,'  the professor  assured him, and went  on : ' Apparently  your National   Library   has  unearthed   some   original  manuscripts  of   the ninth-century necromancer  Herbert Aurilachs. I  have been asked to decipher them. I am the only specialist in the world.'      'Aha! So you're a historian? ' asked Berlioz in a tone of considerable relief and respect.      ' Yes,   I   am  a   historian,'   adding  with  apparently  complete inconsequence, ' this evening a  historic event is going to take place  here at Patriarch's Ponds.'      Again  the editor and the poet showed signs of utter amazement, but the professor beckoned to them and when both had bent their heads towards him he whispered :      'Jesus did exist, you know.'      'Look, professor,'  said  Berlioz, with  a forced smile,  ' With  all respect to you as a scholar we take a different attitude on that point.'      'It's  not a question  of having  an attitude,' replied  the  strange professor. ' He existed, that's all there is to it.'      'But one must have some proof. . . . ' began Berlioz.      'There's  no need  for any  proof,' answered  the professor. In a  low voice, his foreign accent vanishing altogether, he began :      'It's  very  simple--early in  the morning on the  fourteenth  of  the spring month of  Nisan the Procurator of Judaea, Pontius Pilate,  in a white cloak lined with blood-red... 2. Pontius Pilate      Early in the morning on the fourteenth of the spring month of Nisan the Procurator of Judaea, Pontius Pilate, in a white cloak lined with blood-red, emerged with his shuffling cavalryman's walk into  the arcade connecting the two wings of the palace of Herod the Great.      More than anything else in the world the Procurator  hated the smell of attar of roses. The omens  for  the day were  bad,  as this  scent  had been haunting him since dawn.      It seemed to  the Procurator  that the very cypresses and palms in  the garden were exuding the smell of roses, that this damned stench of roses was even mingling with the  smell of leather tackle and  sweat  from his mounted bodyguard.      A  haze  of smoke was  drifting  towards  the  arcade across  the upper courtyard of the garden, coming from the wing at the rear of the palace, the quarters of the first  cohort of the XII Legion ; known as the ' Lightning', it had been stationed  in Jerusalem since the Procurator's arrival. The same oily perfume of roses  was mixed with the acrid  smoke that  showed that the centuries' cooks had started to prepare breakfast.      'Oh gods, what are you punishing me for? . . . No, there's no doubt, I have it again, this terrible incurable pain . .  . hemicrania, when half the head aches  . . .  there's no cure for it, nothing helps. ... I must try not to move my head. . . . '      A  chair had already been  placed on the mosaic floor by  the fountain; without a glance round, the Procurator  sat in it and stretched out his hand 
to one  side.  His secretary deferentially laid a piece of  parchment in his hand. Unable to restrain a grimace  of agony the Procurator gave  a fleeting sideways look  at its  contents, returned the parchment to his secretary and said painfully:      'The  accused comes  from Galilee,  does he? Was  the case sent to the tetrarch? '      'Yes, Procurator,' replied the secretary. ' He declined to confirm the finding of the court and passed the Sanhedrin's sentence of death to you for confirmation.'      The Procurator's cheek twitched and he said quietly :      'Bring in the accused.'      At once two legionaries  escorted a man of  about twenty-seven from the courtyard, under  the  arcade and  up to the balcony, where  they placed him before the Procurator's chair. The  man  was dressed in  a shabby, torn blue chiton.  His  head  was covered  with a  white  bandage  fastened round  his forehead, his hands tied behind his back. There was a large bruise under the man's left  eye and a scab of dried  blood  in  one corner of his mouth. The prisoner stared at the Procurator with anxious curiosity.      The Procurator was silent at first, then asked quietly in Aramaic:      'So  you  have been inciting the people  to  destroy  the  temple  of Jerusalem? '      The Procurator sat as though carved in stone, his lips barely moving as he pronounced the words. The Procurator was like stone from fear of  shaking his fiendishly aching head.      The  man  with  bound  hands  made  a slight move  forwards  and  began speaking:      'Good man! Believe me . . . '      But  the Procurator, immobile as before and without raising  his voice, at once interrupted him :      'You call me good man? You are making  a mistake. The rumour about me in Jerusalem is that I am a raving monster and that is absolutely  correct,' and he added in the same monotone :      'Send centurion Muribellum to me.'      The  balcony seemed to  darken when the centurion of the first century. Mark surnamed Muribellum, appeared  before  the Procurator. Muribellum was a head taller  than  the  tallest soldier in the legion  and  so broad  in the shoulders that he completely obscured the rising sun.      The Procurator said to the centurion in Latin:     'This criminal calls  me " good  man ". Take him away for a minute and show him the proper way to address me. But do not mutilate him.'      All  except  the  motionless  Procurator watched Mark  Muribellum as he gestured to the prisoner  to follow him. Because of his height people always watched  Muribellum wherever he went. Those  who  saw him for the first time were inevitably fascinated  by  his disfigured face : his nose had once been smashed by a blow from a German club.      Mark's heavy boots resounded on the mosaic, the bound  man followed him noiselessly. There  was complete  silence  under  the arcade  except for the cooing of doves in the garden below and the water singing its seductive tune in the fountain.      The  Procurator  had a sudden urge to get up  and put his temples under the stream of  water until they were numb. But he knew  that even that would not help.      Having  led the prisoner out of the  arcade into the garden, Muribellum took a whip from the hands of a legionary standing by the plinth of a bronze statue and with a gentle swing struck the prisoner across the shoulders. The centurion's  movement  was  slight,  almost  negligent,  but  the bound  man collapsed instantly as though his legs had been struck from under him and he gasped for air. The colour fled from his face and his eyes clouded.      With  only  his left hand Mark lifted the fallen  man into  the air  as lightly  as  an  empty sack, set him on his feet and said in  broken,  nasal Aramaic:      'You call  a Roman Procurator "  hegemon "  Don't  say  anything else. Stand to attention. Do you understand or must I hit you again? '      The prisoner  staggered helplessly, his colour  returned, he gulped and 
answered hoarsely :      'I understand you. Don't beat me.'      A  minute later he was again  standing in front of the  Procurator. The harsh, suffering voice rang out:      'Name?'      'Mine? ' enquired the prisoner hurriedly,  his whole being  expressing readiness to answer sensibly and to forestall any further anger.      The Procurator said quietly :      'I know  my  own name. Don't pretend to be stupider than you are. Your name.'      'Yeshua,' replied the prisoner hastily.      'Surname?'      'Ha-Notsri.'      'Where are you from? '      'From the town of  Gamala,' replied the  prisoner, nodding his head to show that far over there to his right, in the north, was the town of Gamala.      'Who are you by birth? '      'I  don't know exactly,' promptly  answered the  prisoner,  ' I don't remember my parents. I was told that my father was a Syrian. . . .'      'Where is your fixed abode? '      'I have no home,' said the prisoner  shamefacedly,  ' I move from town to town.'      'There is a shorter way of saying that--in  a word you are a vagrant,' said the Procurator and asked: ' Have you any relations?'      'No, none. Not one in the world.'      'Can you read and write? ' ' Yes.'      'Do you know any language besides Aramaic?      '' Yes. Greek.'      One swollen  eyelid was  raised and  a  pain-clouded  eye stared at the prisoner. The other eye remained closed. Pilate said in Greek :      'So you intended to destroy the temple building and incited the people to do so?'      'Never,  goo  . . . ' Terror  flashed across the prisoner's  face for having so nearly said the wrong word. '  Never  in my  life, hegemon, have I intended to destroy the temple. Nor have I ever tried to persuade  anyone to do such a senseless thing.'      A look of amazement came over the  secretary's  face as  he bent over a low table recording the evidence. He raised his head but immediately lowered it again over his parchment.      'People of all kinds are  streaming  into the city for the feast-day. Among them  there are magicians, astrologers, seers and murderers,' said the Procurator in a monotone. '  There are also liars.  You, for instance, are a liar.  It is clearly written down : he incited people to destroy the temple. Witnesses have said so.'      'These  good people,'  the  prisoner  began,  and  hastily  adding  ' hegemon', he went on, ' are unlearned and have confused everything I said. I am beginning to fear that this confusion will last for a very long time. And all because he untruthfully wrote down what I said.'      There was silence.  Now  both  pain-filled eyes stared  heavily  at the prisoner.      'I  repeat,  but  for the  last  time--stop  pretending  to  be  mad, scoundrel,'  said  Pilate softly and evenly.  ' What has been  written  down about you is little enough, but it is sufficient to hang you.'      'No, no,  hegemon,' said the prisoner, straining  with the  desire to convince. '  This man follows  me everywhere with  nothing but  his goatskin parchment  and  writes  incessantly. But  I once caught  a  glimpse  of that parchment  and I was horrified. I had  not said a  word  of what was written there.  I  begged him--  please burn this parchment of yours! But he tore it out of my hands and ran away.'      'Who was he? ' enquired Pilate in a strained voice and put his hand to his temple.      'Matthew  the  Levite,'  said  the  prisoner  eagerly.  '  He  was  a tax-collector. I first met him  on the road to Bethlehem at the corner where the road skirts a fig orchard and I started  talking to him. At first he was 
rude and even insulted  me, or rather he  thought  he was  insulting  me  by calling me  a dog.'  The  prisoner laughed. ' Personally I see nothing wrong with that animal so I was not offended by the word. . . .'      The secretary stopped  taking notes and glanced surreptitiously, not at the prisoner, but at the Procurator.      'However,  when he had  heard me out he grew milder,' went on Yeshua,' and in the end  he threw his money into the  road and said that he would  go travelling with me. . . .'      Pilate  laughed with one cheek. Baring  his  yellow  teeth  and turning fully round to his secretary he said :      'Oh,  city of Jerusalem! What tales you have to tell! A tax-collector, did you hear, throwing away his money!'      Not  knowing what reply was expected  of him,  the  secretary chose  to return Pilate's smile.      'And he said that henceforth he  loathed his money,'  said Yeshua  in explanation of Matthew the Levite's strange  action,  adding  : ' And  since then he has been my companion.'      His  teeth  still  bared in  a  grin,  the  Procurator glanced  at  the prisoner, then at the sun rising  inexorably over the  equestrian statues of the hippodrome far below to his left, and  suddenly in a moment of agonising nausea it occurred to him that the simplest thing would be  to  dismiss this curious rascal from his balcony with no more than two words :  ' Hang him. ' Dismiss the body-guard  too, leave the arcade and go indoors, order the room to be darkened, fall on to his couch, send for cold water, call for  his dog Banga in a  pitiful  voice  and complain  to  the dog  about his hemicrania. Suddenly  the tempting thought of  poison flashed  through  the Procurator's mind.      He stared dully at the prisoner for a while, trying painfully to recall why this man  with  the bruised  face was  standing  in front of him  in the pitiless  Jerusalem morning sunshine and what further  useless questions  he should put to him.      'Matthew the  Levite?  ' asked the suffering man in  a  hoarse voice, closing his eyes.      'Yes, Matthew the Levite,' came the grating, high-pitched reply.      'So you did make a speech about the temple to the crowd in the temple forecourt? '      The  voice  that  answered  seemed  to  strike  Pilate on the forehead, causing him inexpressible torture and it said:      'I  spoke, hegemon, of how the temple of the old beliefs  would  fall down and the new temple of truth  would be built up.  I  used those words to make my meaning easier to understand.'      'Why should a tramp like you upset the crowd in the bazaar by  talking about truth, something of which you have no conception? What is truth? '      At this the Procurator thought: ' Ye gods! This is a court of law and I am asking him an irrelevant question . . . my mind no longer obeys me. . . . ' Once more he had  a  vision  of a goblet of dark liquid. ' Poison,  I need poison.. .. ' And again he heard the voice :      'At this moment the  truth is  chiefly  that  your head is aching  and aching so hard  that you are having cowardly thoughts about  death. Not only are you in no condition to talk to me, but it even hurts  you to look at me. This makes me seem to be your torturer, which distresses me. You cannot even think and you can  only long for your dog, who is clearly the  only creature for  whom  you  have any  affection. But  the pain will  stop  soon and your headache will go.'      The secretary stared at the prisoner, his note-taking abandoned. Pilate raised his martyred eyes to the prisoner and saw how high the sun now  stood above the hippodrome, how a ray had penetrated the arcade, had crept towards Yeshua's patched sandals  and how the man moved aside from the sunlight. The Procurator stood  up and clasped his head in his hands. Horror came over his yellowish,  clean-shaven  face. With  an effort  of  will he  controlled his expression and sank back into his chair.      Meanwhile the prisoner continued talking, but the secretary had stopped writing, craning his neck  like a goose  in the effort not to miss  a single 
word.      'There,  it  has  gone,' said the  prisoner,  with a kindly glance at Pilate. ' I am so glad. I would advise you, hegemon, to leave the palace for a while and take a walk somewhere nearby, perhaps in the gardens or on Mount Eleona. There will be thunder . . .' The prisoner turned and  squinted  into the sun .  . . ' later, towards evening. A walk would do you a great deal of good  and I should be happy to go with you. Some new thoughts have just come into my head which you might, I think, find interesting and I should like to discuss  them  with you,  the  more so as you  strike me  as a  man of great intelligence.' The secretary turned mortally  pale and dropped his scroll to the  ground. '  Your trouble is,' went  on the  unstoppable prisoner, ' that your  mind  is  too closed and  you have finally  lost your  faith in  human beings. You must admit  that no one ought to lavish all their devotion on  a dog. Your life is a cramped one, hegemon.' Here  the speaker allowed himself to smile.      The  only  thought in the  secretary's  mind  now was whether  he could believe his  ears. He had to  believe them. He then  tried to guess in  what strange form the Procurator's fiery temper might break out at the prisoner's unheard-of insolence. Although he  knew the Procurator well  the secretary's imagination failed him.      Then the hoarse, broken voice of the Procurator barked out in Latin:      'Untie his hands.'      One of the legionary escorts tapped the ground with his  lance, gave it to his neighbour, approached and removed the prisoner's bonds. The secretary picked up his scroll, decided  to take no more notes for  a while  and to be astonished at nothing he might hear.      'Tell me,' said Pilate softly in Latin, ' are you a great physician?'      'No, Procurator, I am no physician,' replied the  prisoner, gratefully rubbing his twisted, swollen, purpling wrist.      Staring from beneath his eyelids, Pilate's eyes bored into the prisoner and those eyes  were no  longer dull. They  now flashed with their  familiar sparkle. ' I did not ask you,' said Pilate. ' Do you know Latin too? '      'Yes, I do,' replied the prisoner.      The  colour flowed  back into Pilate's yellowed cheeks and he  asked in Latin:      'How did you know that I wanted to call my dog? '      'Quite simple,' the prisoner answered in  Latin. ' You moved your hand through the air  . . . ' the  prisoner repeated Pilate's gesture .  . . ' as though to stroke something and your lips . . .'      'Yes,' said Pilate.      There was silence. Then Pilate put a question in Greek :      'So you are a physician? '      'No, no,' was the prisoner's eager reply. ' Believe me I am not.'      'Very well,  if you wish to keep it a secret, do so. It has  no direct bearing on the case. So you maintain  that  you never incited people to tear down ... or burn, or by any means destroy the temple?'      'I repeat,  hegemon, that I  have  never tried to  persuade  anyone to attempt any such thing. Do I look weak in the head? '      'Oh no, you  do not,' replied the  Procurator quietly, and  smiled an ominous smile. ' Very well, swear that it is not so.'      'What would you have me swear by? ' enquired the unbound prisoner with great urgency.      'Well, by your  life,' replied  the Procurator. ' It is high  time to swear by it because you should know that it is hanging by a thread.'      'You do not believe,  do you, hegemon, that  it is you who have strung it up?' asked the prisoner. ' If you do you are mistaken.'      Pilate shuddered and answered through clenched teeth :      'I can cut that thread.'      'You  are  mistaken  there  too,'  objected  the prisoner, beaming and shading himself from the sun with his hand. ' You  must agree, I think, that the thread can only be cut by the one who has suspended it? '      'Yes, yes,' said Pilate, smiling.  ' I now have no doubt that the idle gapers of Jerusalem have been pursuing you. I do not know who strung up your tongue, but  he  strung it  well. By the  way. tell me, is it true that  you 
entered Jerusalem  by the Susim Gate  mounted on a donkey, accompanied by  a rabble who greeted you  as though you were a prophet? '  Here the Procurator pointed to a scroll of parchment.      The prisoner stared dubiously at the Procurator.      'I  have  no  donkey, hegemon,'  he  said.  ' I  certainly  came into Jerusalem through the  Susim  Gate,  but I came  on  foot  alone  except for Matthew the  Levite  and nobody shouted a word to me  as no one in Jerusalem knew me then.'      'Do you happen to know,' went on  Pilate without taking  his eyes off the prisoner, ' anyone called Dismas? Or Hestas? Or a third--Bar-Abba? '      'I do not know these good men,' replied the prisoner.      'Is that the truth? '      'It is.'      'And now tell me why you  always use that expression " good  men "? Is that what you call everybody? '      'Yes, everybody,' answered the prisoner. ' There are no evil people on earth.'      'That is news to me,' said Pilate with a laugh. ' But perhaps I am too ignorant of life. You need take no further notes,' he said to the secretary, although  the man had taken  none for some time. Pilate turned back  to  the prisoner :      'Did you read about that in some Greek book? '     'No, I reached that conclusion in my own mind.'      'And is that what you preach? '      ‘ Yes.'      'Centurion Mark Muribellum, for instance--is he good? '      'Yes,' replied the  prisoner. ' He  is, it is  true,  an unhappy man. Since  the  good people disfigured him he has become harsh  and callous.  It would be interesting to know who mutilated him.'      'That I  will  gladly  tell you,' rejoined Pilate, '  because  I was a witness to it. These  good men threw  themselves at him like dogs at a bear. The Germans clung to his neck, his arms, his  legs. An  infantry maniple had been  ambushed and had it not  been for  a troop of cavalry breaking through from  the flank--a troop  commanded by me--you,  philosopher, would not have been talking to Muribellum just now. It happened at the battle of Idistavizo in the Valley of the Virgins.'      'If I were to talk to him,' the prisoner suddenly said in a reflective voice, ' I am sure that he would change greatly.'      'I suspect,' said Pilate, ' that the Legate of the Legion would not be best pleased if you took it into your head to talk to one of his officers or soldiers. Fortunately for us all  any such thing is  forbidden and the first person to ensure that it cannot occur would be myself.'      At  that moment a swallow  darted into the  arcade,  circled  under the gilded ceiling, flew lower, almost brushed its pointed wingtip over the face of  a bronze statue  in  a niche and  disappeared behind  the  capital of  a column, perhaps with the thought of nesting there.      As it flew an  idea formed  itself in the  Procurator's mind, which was now bright and clear. It was thus : the hegemon had examined the case of the vagrant philosopher Yeshua, surnamed  Ha-Notsri, and  could not substantiate the  criminal  charge made against him. In particular he could not find  the slightest  connection between Yeshua's actions  and the  recent disorders in Jerusalem.  The vagrant  philosopher was mentally ill, as a  result of which the sentence  of death pronounced on Ha-Notsri by the Lesser Sanhedrin would not be confirmed. But in view of the danger of unrest liable to be caused by Yeshua's mad, Utopian preaching, the Procurator would  remove  the  man from Jerusalem and  sentence him to imprisonment  in Caesarea  Stratonova  on the Mediterranean--the place of the Procurator's own residence. It only remained to dictate this to the secretary.      The  swallow's wings fluttered  over  the hegemon's head, the bird flew towards the fountain and out into freedom.      The Procurator raised his eyes to the prisoner and saw that a column of dust had swirled up beside him.      'Is that all there is on this man? ' Pilate asked the secretary.      'No, unfortunately,' replied the secretary  unexpectedly, and  handed 
Pilate another parchment.      'What else is there? ' enquired Pilate and frowned.      Having  read the further evidence  a change  came over his  expression. Whether it  was blood flowing back into his neck and  face or from something else that  occurred,  his skin changed from yellow to red-brown and his eyes appeared to collapse. Probably caused by the increased blood-pressure in his temples, something happened to the Procurator's  sight. He seemed to see the prisoner's head vanish  and  another appear in  its place,  bald and crowned with a spiked golden diadem. The skin  of the forehead was split by a round, livid  scar  smeared  with  ointment.  A  sunken,  toothless  mouth  with  a capricious, pendulous lower  lip.  Pilate had  the  sensation  that the pink columns of his balcony  and the roofscape of Jerusalem below and  beyond the garden had all vanished, drowned in the thick foliage of cypress groves. His hearing, too,  was  strangely  affected--there  was a  sound  as of  distant trumpets,  muted and threatening, and  a nasal voice could clearly be  heard arrogantly intoning the words: ' The law pertaining to high treason . . .'      Strange, rapid, disconnected thoughts passed through his mind. '  Dead! '  Then  :  '  They  have  killed him! . .  .' And  an absurd  notion  about immortality, the thought of which aroused a sense of unbearable grief.      Pilate straightened  up, banished the vision, turned his  gaze back  to the balcony and again the prisoner's eyes met his.      'Listen,  Ha-Notsri,' began  the Procurator, giving  Yeshua a strange look. His expression was grim but his eyes betrayed anxiety. ' Have you ever said anything about great Caesar? Answer! Did you say anything of the  sort? Or did you  . . . not?  '  Pilate gave the word 'not' more emphasis than was proper  in  a  court of law and his  look  seemed  to be trying to project a particular thought into the prisoner's mind. ' Telling the truth is easy and pleasant,' remarked the prisoner.      'I do  not want to know,'  replied  Pilate  in  a voice of  suppressed anger, ' whether you enjoy telling the truth or not. You are obliged to tell me  the truth. But  when you speak weigh every word, if  you wish to avoid a painful death.'      No one knows what passed through the  mind of the Procurator of Judaea, but he permitted himself to raise  his hand as though shading himself from a ray of sunlight and, shielded by  that hand, to throw the prisoner  a glance that conveyed a hint.      'So,' he said, ' answer this question : do you know a certain Judas of Karioth and  if you have  ever  spoken to him  what did you say to him about Caesar? '      'It happened  thus,'  began  the prisoner readily.  ' The day  before yesterday,  in the evening,  I met a young man  near the  temple  who called himself Judas, from the town of Karioth.  He invited  me to  his home in the Lower City and gave me supper...'      'Is he a good man? ' asked Pilate, a diabolical glitter in his eyes.      'A very  good  man and eager to learn,'  affirmed the prisoner.  ' He expressed the greatest interest in my ideas and welcomed me joyfully .. . '      'Lit the  candles. . . .' said  Pilate through  clenched teeth  to the prisoner, his eyes glittering.      'Yes,' said Yeshua, slightly astonished that the Procurator  should be so  well  informed,  and  went  on  : ' He  asked  me  for  my views on  the government. The question interested him very much.'     'And so what did you say? ' asked Pilate. ' Or are you going to reply that  you have  forgotten what you said? '  But  there was already a note of hopelessness in Pilate's voice.      'Among other  things I said,' continued the prisoner, ' that all power is a form of violence exercised over people and that the time will come when there will be no rule by Caesar nor any other form  of  rule. Man will  pass into  the king     'Chops  once! Kebab  twice! Chicken a la King! ' The vocalist  was no longer  singing--he was  howling. Now and again the crash of  cymbals in the band drowned the noise of dirty  crockery flung down a  sloping chute to the scullery. In short--hell.      At  midnight  there appeared a vision in this hell. On  to the verandah strode a  handsome, black-eyed man with  a  pointed beard and wearing a tail coat. With  regal gaze he  surveyed his  domain. According to some romantics there had once been a time when  this noble figure had worn not  tails but a broad  leather belt  round  his  waist, stuck with  pistol-butts,  that  his raven-black hair had been tied up  in a scarlet kerchief and  that  his brig had sailed the Caribbean under the Jolly Roger.      But that, of  course, is pure fantasy--the Caribbean  doesn't exist, no desperate  buccaneers sail it,  no  corvette ever chases  them, no  puffs of cannon-smoke  ever  roll across  the waves.  Pure  invention.  Look  at that scraggy tree, look at the iron railings, the boulevard. . . . And the ice is floating in the  wine-bucket and  at  the  next table  there's  a  man  with ox-like, bloodshot  eyes and it's pandemonium. . . . Oh gods--poison, I need poison! . . .      Suddenly  from  one of the tables the  word ' Berlioz!!  ' flew  up and exploded in the air.  Instantly the band  collapsed  and stopped, as  though someone had punched it. ' What, what, what--what?!! '      'Berlioz!!! '      Everybody began rushing about and screaming.      A  wave  of  grief  surged  up  at  the  terrible  news  about  Mikhail Alexandrovich.   Someone   fussed  around   shouting  that  they  must   all immediately,  here and now,  without delay compose a collective telegram and send it off.      But what telegram, you may ask? And why  send  it? Send  it  where? And what  use is  a telegram to the man whose  battered skull is being mauled by the  rubber  hands of  a  dissector,  whose neck  is being  pierced  by  the professor's crooked needles? He's dead, he doesn't want a telegram. It's all over, let's not overload the post office.      Yes, he's dead . . . but we are still alive!      The wave of grief rose, lasted  for a while and then  began  to recede. Somebody  went  back  to their  table  and--furtively to  begin  with,  then openly--drank a glass of vodka and took a bite to eat. After all, what's the point of wasting the  cotelettes de volatile?  What good are we going  to do Mikhail Alexandrovich by going hungry? We're still alive, aren't we?      Naturally the piano was shut  and locked, the  band went home and a few journalists left for their newspaper offices  to write obituaries. The  news spread  that Zheldybin was back from  the  morgue.  He moved  into Berlioz's upstairs office and at once  a rumour started that he was going to take over from Berlioz.  Zheldybin  summoned  all  twelve  members  of the  management committee  from  the  restaurant and  in  an  emergency session  they  began discussing such urgent questions  as the preparation of the colonnaded hall, the transfer of  the body  from the morgue, the times at which members could attend the lying-in-state and other matters connected with the tragic event.      Downstairs in the restaurant life had returned to normal and would have continued on its usual nocturnal course  until closing time at four, had not something quite abnormal occurred which shocked the diners considerably more than the news of Berlioz's death.      The first to be alarmed were the cab drivers  waiting outside the gates of Griboyedov. Jerking up with a start one of them shouted:      'Hey! Look at that!' A little glimmer flared up near the iron railings and started to bob towards the verandah. Some of the diners stood up, stared and saw that  the nickering light was accompanied  by a white apparition. As it  approached  the  verandah  trellis  every  diner  froze,  eyes  bulging, sturgeon-laden forks motionless  in  mid-air.  The  club porter, who at that moment had just left the restaurant cloakroom  to  go outside  for a  smoke, stubbed  out his cigarette  and  was just going to advance on the apparition with  the aim of barring its way into the restaurant when for some reason he changed his mind, stopped and grinned stupidly.      The apparition, passing through an  opening in the trellis, mounted the verandah  unhindered. As it did so  everyone saw that this was no apparition 
but the distinguished poet Ivan Nikolayich Bezdomny.      He was barefoot and wearing a torn, dirty white Russian blouse.  To its front was safety-pinned  a paper ikon with a picture  of some unknown saint. He was  wearing long  white underpants with a lighted candle in his hand and his  right cheek bore a fresh scratch. It would be hard to fathom  the depth of the silence which reigned on the verandah.  Beer poured  on to the  floor from a mug held sideways by one of the waiters.      The poet raised the candle above his head and said in a loud voice :      'Greetings,  friends!'  He then looked  under  the  nearest table  and exclaimed with disappointment:      'No, he's not there.'      Two voices were heard. A bass voice said pitilessly : ' An obvious case of D.Ts.'      The second, a frightened woman's voice enquired nervously :      'How did the police let him on to the streets in that state? '      Ivan Nikolayich heard this and replied :      'They tried to arrest me twice, once in Skatertny Street and once here on Bronnaya, but  I climbed over the fence  and  that's  how  I scratched my cheek!  ' Ivan  Nikolayich  lifted  up his  candle  and  shouted:  '  Fellow artists!' (His squeaky voice grew stronger and more urgent.) ' Listen to me, all of you! He's come! Catch him at once or he'll do untold harm! '      'What's that? What? What did  he say? Who's come? ' came the questions from all sides.      'A professor,' answered  Ivan, ' and it was  this professor who killed Misha Berlioz this evening at Patriarch's.'      By now people were streaming on  to the verandah  from the indoor rooms and a crowd began milling round Ivan.      'I beg  your pardon, would you say that again more clearly? ' said  a low, courteous voice  right beside Ivan Nikolayich's ear. ' Tell me, how was he killed? Who killed him? '      'A foreigner--he's a professor  and  a spy,'  replied  Ivan,  looking round.      'What's his name? ' said the voice again into his ear.      'That's just the trouble!' cried Ivan in frustration. ' If only I knew his name!  I  couldn't read it  properly  on his  visiting card  ...  I only remember the letter ' W '--the name began  with a ' W  '. What could it have been? ' Ivan asked himself aloud,  clutching his forehead with his  hand.  ' We, wi,  wa .  . . wo . . . Walter? Wagner?  Weiner?  Wegner? Winter? '  The hairs on Ivan's head started to stand on end from the effort.      'Wolff? ' shouted a woman, trying to help him.     Ivan lost his temper.      'You fool!' he shouted, looking for the  woman in  the crowd. ' What's Wolff  got to  do with it? He didn't do it ...  Wo, wa  . . . No, I'll never remember it like this. Now look,  everybody-- ring up the police at once and tell them to  send five motorcycles and sidecars with machine-guns to  catch the professor. And don't forget to say that there are two others with him--a tall fellow in checks with a wobbly  pince-nez and a  great black cat. . . . Meanwhile I'm going to search Griboyedov--I can sense that he's here! '      Ivan was by now in a state  of some  excitement. Pushing the bystanders aside he began waving his candle about,  pouring wax on himself, and started to look under the tables. Then somebody said ' Doctor!  ' and a  fat, kindly face,  clean-shaven,  smelling  of drink  and  with  horn-rimmed spectacles, appeared in front of Ivan.      'Comrade Bezdomny,' said  the face solemnly, ' calm down! You're upset by  the death of our beloved  Mikhail Alexandrovich  . . . no, I  mean plain Misha  Berlioz.  We all realise how you feel. You need rest. You'll be taken home to bed in a moment and then you can relax and forget all about it. . .'      'Don't you realise,'  Ivan interrupted, scowling, ' that we've got to catch the professor? And all  you can  do is  come creeping up to me talking all this rubbish! Cretin! '      'Excuse me. Comrade Bezdomny! ' replied the face, blushing, retreating and already wishing it had never let itself get involved in this affair.      'No,  I  don't  care  who  you are--I  won't excuse you,'  said  Ivan Nikolayich with quiet hatred. 
     A  spasm distorted his  face, he rapidly switched the  candle from  his right to his left hand,  swung his arm and punched the sympathetic  face  on the ear.      Several  people  reached  the  same  conclusion  at   once  and  hurled themselves at Ivan. The candle went out, the horn-rims fell off the face and were instantly smashed underfoot. Ivan let out a dreadful war-whoop audible, to  everybody's embarrassment, as far as the boulevard, and began  to defend himself. There came a tinkle of breaking crockery, women screamed.      While the waiters tied up the poet with dish-cloths, a conversation was in progress in the cloakroom between the porter and the captain of the brig.      'Didn't  you see that he was  wearing underpants? ' asked  the  pirate coldly.      'But  Archibald Archibaldovich--I'm a coward,' replied the porter,  ' how could I stop him from coming in? He's a member!'      'Didn't you see that he was wearing underpants? ' repeated the pirate.      'Please, Archibald Archibaldovich,--' said the porter, turning purple, ' what could I do? I know there are ladies on the ver-andah, but...'      'The ladies  don't matter.  They don't  mind,'  replied  the  pirate, roasting the  porter with his glare. ' But the police mind! There's only one way  a man can walk round Moscow in his  underwear--when he's being escorted by the  police on the way to a police station! And you, if you call yourself a  porter, ought to  know that if you see a man in that state it's your duty not to waste a moment but to start blowing your whistle I Do you hear? Can't you hear what's happening on the verandah? '      The wretched  porter could hear the sounds of smashing crockery, groans and women's screams from the verandah only too well.      'Now what do you propose to do about it? ' enquired the buccaneer.      The skin on the porter's face took on a leprous shade and his eyes went blank. It  seemed to him that the other man's black hair, now neatly parted, was  covered by  a fiery silk  kerchief.  Starched shirtfront  and tail-coat vanished, a  pistol was  sticking  out of his leather belt.  The porter  saw himself  dangling from the foretop yard-arm,  his tongue protruding from his lifeless, drooping head. He could  even hear  the  waves lapping against the ship's side. The porter's knees trembled. But the buccaneer took pity on him and switched off his terrifying glare.      'All right, Nikolai--but mind it  never happens  again! We can't  have porters  like you  in a restaurant--you'd better go  and be  a  verger  in a church.' Having said this the captain gave a few rapid, crisp, clear orders: ' Send the barman.  Police. Statement. Car. Mental hospital.' And he added : 'Whistle!'      A quarter of an hour later, to  the astonishment  of  the people in the restaurant, on the  boulevard and at the  windows of the surrounding houses, the  barman, the  porter, a policeman, a waiter and the poet Ryukhin were to be seen emerging from  the gates  of Griboyedov dragging a young man trussed up like a  mummy, who was weeping, spitting,  lashing  out  at  Ryukhin  and shouting for the whole street to hear :      'You swine! . . . You swine! . . . '      A buzzing  crowd collected, discussing  the incredible scene. It was of course an  abominable,  disgusting, thrilling,  revolting scandal which only ended when  a  lorry drove  away from the gates  of Griboyedov carrying  the unfortunate Ivan Nikolayich, the policeman, the barman and Ryukhin. 6. Schizophrenia      At half past one in the morning  a man with a pointed beard and wearing a  white overall  entered the reception hall of a  famous psychiatric clinic recently completed in  the  suburbs of Moscow. Three orderlies  and the poet Ryukhin  stood nervously watching Ivan Nikolayich as he sat on  a divan. The dish-cloths that had been used to  pinion  Ivan Nikolayich now lay in a heap 
on the same divan, leaving his arms and legs free.      As the man came in Ryukhin turned pale, coughed and said timidly:      'Good morning, doctor.'      The  doctor  bowed  to Ryukhin but looked  at Ivan Nikolayich,  who was sitting completely immobile and  scowling furiously. He  did not  even  move when the doctor appeared.      'This,  doctor,' began  Ryukhin  in  a  mysterious  whisper, glancing anxiously at Ivan Nikolayich,  ' is the  famous  poet  Ivan  Bezdomny. We're afraid he may have D.Ts.'      'Has he been drinking heavily? ' enquired the doctor through  clenched teeth.      'No, he's had a few drinks, but not enough . . .'      'Has he been trying to catch spiders, rats, little devils or dogs? '      'No,'  replied Ryukhin,  shuddering. '  I saw  him yesterday  and this morning ... he was perfectly well then.'      'Why is he in his underpants? Did you have to pull him out of bed?'      'He came into a restaurant like this, doctor'      'Aha, aha,' said the doctor in a tone of great satisfaction. ' And why the scratches? Has he been fighting? '      'He fell off the fence and then he hit someone in the restaurant , . . and someone else, too  .  . .' ' I see, I see, I  see,' said the doctor  and added, turning to Ivan :      'Good morning! '      'Hello, you quack! ' said Ivan, loudly and viciously.      Ryukhin  was so  embarrassed that  he  dared  not  raise  his eyes. The courteous doctor, however, showed no signs  of offence and with a  practised gesture took off  his spectacles, lifted the skirt  of his overall, put them in his hip pocket and then asked Ivan:      'How old are you? '      'Go to hell! ' shouted Ivan rudely and turned away.      'Why are  you being so disagreeable?  Have  I said anything to  upset you?'      'I'm twenty-three,'  said  Ivan excitedly, ' and I'm  going to lodge a complaint against all of you--and you in particular, you louse! ' He spat at Ryukhin.      'What will your complaint be? '      'That you arrested  me, a perfectly healthy man, and forcibly dragged me off to the madhouse! ' answered Ivan in fury.      At this  Ryukhin took a  close look at Ivan and felt  a chill  down his spine  : there was not a trace of insanity in the man's eyes.  They had been slightly clouded at Griboyedov, but now they were as clear as before.      'Godfathers! ' thought Ryukhin in  terror. '  He really  is perfectly normal! What  a ghastly  business!  Why  have  we brought him here?  There's nothing the matter with him except a few scratches on his face . . .'      'You are not,' said the doctor calmly, sitting down  on a stool on  a single chromium-plated stalk, ' in  a madhouse but in a clinic, where nobody is  going to keep you  if it  isn't necessary.'  Ivan  gave him a suspicious scowl, but muttered :      'Thank  God for that!  At last I've found one  normal person among all these idiots and the worst idiot of the lot is that incompetent fraud Sasha! '      'Who is this incompetent  Sasha? ' enquired  the doctor. ' That's him, Ryukhin,' replied Ivan, jabbing a dirty finger in      Ryukhin's direction, who spluttered in protest. ' That's all the thanks I get,'  he  thought bitterly, ' for  showing  him  some  sympathy!  What  a miserable swine he is! '      * A  typical kulak mentality,' said Ivan Nikolayich, who obviously felt a sudden urge to attack Ryukhin. ' And what's more he's a kulak masquerading as a proletarian. Look at his mean face and compare it with all that pompous verse he writes for  May Day ... all that stuff about  "onwards and upwards" and  "banners  waving  "! If  you could  look inside  him and  see what he's thinking you'd be sickened! ' And Ivan Nikolayich  gave a hoot  of malicious laughter.      Ryukhin, breathing heavily, turned red. There was  only  one thought in 
his mind--that he had nourished a serpent in his bosom, that he had tried to help someone who when it came to the pinch had treacherously rounded on him. The worst of it was that  he could not answer back--one  mustn't swear at  a lunatic!      'Exactly why have they brought you here?  ' asked the  doctor, who had listened to Bezdomny's outburst with great attention.      'God knows, the blockheads! They  grabbed me,  tied  me  up  with some filthy rags and dumped me in a lorry!'      'May  I ask  why you  came  into  the restaurant in  nothing but your underwear?'      'There's nothing odd about it,' answered Ivan. '  I went for a swim in the  Moscow  River  and  someone pinched my  clothes  and left me this  junk instead! I  couldn't  walk round Moscow naked, could I? I had to put on what there was, because I was in a hurry to get to the Griboyedov restaurant.'      The doctor glanced questioningly at Ryukhin, who mumbled sulkily:      'Yes, that's the name of the restaurant.'      'Aha,' said the doctor, ' but why were you in  such a hurry?  Did  you have an appointment there? '      'I  had  to catch the  professor,'  replied  Ivan Nikolayich, glancing nervously round.      'What professor? ' ' Do you  know Berlioz? ' asked Ivan with a meaning look.      'You mean . . . the composer? '      Ivan  looked  puzzled. ' What  composer?  Oh,  yes  . . . no,  no.  The composer just happens to have the same name as Misha Berlioz.'      Ryukhin was still feeling too offended to speak, but he had to explain:      'Berlioz,  the  chairman  of  MASSOLIT, was  run over by a  tram  this evening at Patriarch's.'      'Don't lie, you--you don't know anything  about it,' Ivan burst out at Ryukhin. '  I was there,  not you!  He made  him fall  under  that  tram  on purpose! '      'Did he push him? '      'What  are  you  talking  about?'  exclaimed Ivan,  irritated by  his listener's failure to grasp the situation. ' He didn't have to push  him! He can do things you'd never believe! He knew in advance that Berlioz was going to fall under a tram! '      'Did anybody see this professor apart from you? '      'No, that's the trouble. Only Berlioz and myself.'      'I see.  What steps  did  you take  to arrest this murderer?' At this point the  doctor turned  and threw a glance at a woman  in a  white overall sitting behind a desk.      'This is what I did : I took this candle from the kitchen . . .'      'This  one? ' asked the doctor, pointing to  a broken candle lying  on the desk beside the ikon.      'Yes, that's the one, and . . .'      'Why the ikon? '      'Well, er, the  ikon. . . .' Ivan blushed. ' You see an ikon frightens them more than  anything else.' He again pointed at Ryukhin.  ' But the fact is that the professor is ... well, let's be frank . . . he's  in league with the powers of evil . . . and it's not so easy to catch someone like him.'      The orderlies stretched their hands down their trouser-seams and stared even harder at Ivan.      'Yes,'  went  on Ivan. ' He's in league with them. There's no arguing about it.  He once talked to Pontius Pilate. It's no good looking at me like that,  I'm telling  you  the  truth!  He saw  it all --the balcony, the palm trees. He was actually with Pontius Pilate, I'll swear it.'      'Well, now . . .'      'So, as I was saying, I pinned the ikon to my chest and ran .,.'      Here the clock struck twice.      'Oh, my  God!  ' exclaimed Ivan and rose  from the divan.  ' It's two o'clock  and here am I wasting  time talking to you! Would you mind--where's the telephone? '      'Show him the telephone,' the doctor said to the orderlies.      As Ivan grasped the receiver the woman quietly asked Ryukhin: 
     'Is he married? '      'No, he's a bachelor,' replied Ryukhin, startled.      'Is he a union member? '      'Yes.'      'Police? ' shouted Ivan into  the  mouthpiece.  ' Police? Is that the duty  officer?  Sergeant,  please  arrange  to send five  motor  cycles with sidecars,  armed  with machine-guns  to  arrest the foreign professor. What? Take me with you, I'll show you where to go. .  . . This is  Bezdomny, I'm a poet, and I'm speaking from the lunatic asylum. . . . What's your address? ' Bezdomny whispered to the doctor, covering the mouthpiece with his palm, and then yelled back into the receiver: ' Are you listening? Hullo! . . . Fools! .  . .' Ivan suddenly roared, hurling  the  receiver at  the  wall. Then  he turned  round to  the doctor, offered him  his hand, said a curt goodbye and started to go.      'Excuse  me, but  where are you  proposing to go?'  said  the doctor, looking Ivan in the eye. ' At  this hour of night, in your  underwear .  . . You're not well, stay with us.'      'Come on, let me through,' said Ivan to the orderlies who had lined up to  block the doorway. ' Are you  going  to let me go or not?  ' shouted the poet in a terrible voice.      Ryukhin  shuddered.  The  woman  pressed  a  button on  the  desk  ;  a glittering  metal box  and  a  sealed  ampoule  popped out  on to its  glass surface.      'Ah,  so that's  your game, is  it?  ' said Ivan with  a wild, hunted glance around. ' All  right then . . . Goodbye!! ' And he threw himself head first at the shuttered window.      There was a loud crash, but the glass  did not even crack, and a moment later  Ivan Nikolayich  was  struggling  in  the arms  of  the orderlies. He screamed, tried to bite, then shouted :      'Fine sort of glass you put in your windows! Let me go! Let me go! '      A hypodermic syringe glittered in the doctor's hand, with one sweep the woman pushed back the tattered sleeve of  Ivan's blouse  and clamped his arm in a most  un-feminine  grip.  There  was a  smell of ether,  Ivan  weakened slightly  in the grasp of the  four men and the  doctor skilfully seized the moment to  jab the  needle into Ivan's arm. Ivan kept up  the struggle for a few more seconds, then collapsed on to the divan.      'Bandits! ' cried Ivan and leaped up, only to be  pushed back. As soon as they  let him go he jumped up again, but sat down of  his  own accord. He said nothing, staring  wildly about him, then gave a sudden  unexpected yawn and smiled malevolently :      'So you're going to lock me up after all,' he said, yawned again, lay down with his head on the cushion, his fist under his cheek like a child and muttered in a sleepy voice but without malice : '  All right, then . . . but you'll pay for it ... I warned you, but if you want to ... What interests me most now is Pontius Pilate . . .  Pilate . .  .' And with that he closed his eyes.      'Vanna, put him in No. 117 by himself and with someone to watch him.' The doctor gave his  instructions and replaced his spectacles. Then  Ryukhin shuddered again : a pair of white  doors  opened without a sound  and beyond them stretched  a  corridor lit  by  a row of  blue night-bulbs. Out  of the corridor rolled a couch on rubber wheels. The sleeping Ivan was lifted on to it, he was pushed off down the corridor and the doors closed after him.      'Doctor,' asked the shaken Ryukhin in a whisper, ' is he really ill?'      'Oh yes,' replied the doctor.      'Then what's the matter with him?' enquired Rvukhin timidly.      The exhausted doctor looked at Ryukhin and answered wearily:      'Overstimulation  of the motor  nerves  and  speech  centres  .  .  . delirious  illusions. . .  . Obviously a complicated case.  Schizophrenia, I should think . . . touch of alcoholism, too. . . .'     Ryukhin  understood  nothing of this, except that Ivan  Nikolayich  was obviously in poor shape. He sighed and asked :      'What was that he said about some professor? '     'I  expect  he  saw  someone  who  gave  a  shock  to  his  disturbed imagination. Or maybe it was a hallucination. . . .'
     A few  minutes later a lorry  was taking Ryukhin back into Moscow. Dawn was  breaking  and  the  still-lit  street  lamps   seemed  superfluous  and unpleasant. The driver, annoyed at missing a night's sleep, pushed his lorry as hard as it would go, making it skid round the corners.      The woods fell  away in  the  distance and  the river  wandered off  in another direction. As the lorry drove on the scenery slowly changed: fences, a  watchman's  hut,  piles of  logs, dried  and split  telegraph  poles with bobbins strung  on  the wires  between  them,  heaps of  stones, ditches--in short, a feeling that Moscow was about to appear round  the  next corner and would rise up and engulf them at any moment.      The  log  of  wood on  which  Ryukhin  was sitting  kept  wobbling  and slithering  about and now and again it  tried to slide away  from  under him altogether.  The restaurant dish-cloths, which the policeman and the  barman had  thrown  on  to  the  back  of  the  lorry  before  leaving  earlier  by trolley-bus, were  being flung about all over the back of the lorry. Ryukhin started to  try and pick them up, but  with a sudden burst  of ill-temper he hissed :      'To hell with them! Why should I crawl around after  them? ' He pushed them away with his foot and turned away from them.      Ryukhin was in a state of depression. It was  obvious that his visit to the asylum had affected him deeply. He tried  to think  what it was that was disturbing him. Was it the corridor with its blue lamps, which had lodged so firmly in  his memory? Was  it the  thought that the worst misfortune in the world was to lose  one's reason? Yes, it was that, of course--but that after all was a generalisation, it applied to everybody. There was something else, though.  What was it? The  insult--that  was it. Yes, those insulting  words that Bezdomny had flung into his face. And the agony of it was not that they were insulting but that they were true.      The poet stopped looking about him and  instead stared gloomily at  the dirty, shaking floor of the lorry in an agony of self-reproach.      Yes, his poetry . . . He  was thirty-two! And  what were his prospects? To go on  writing a few poems every year. How long--until he was an old man? Yes,  until he was an old man.  What would these poems do for  him? Make him famous? ' What rubbish! Don't fool  yourself.  Nobody ever gets famous  from writing bad poetry. Why is it bad, though? He was right --he was telling the truth! '  said  Ryukhin pitilessly to himself. I don't believe in  a  single word of what I've written . . .! '      Embittered by  an upsurge  of neurasthenia, the poet swayed. The  floor beneath had stopped shaking. Ryukhin  lifted his head and saw that he was in the middle of Moscow, that day had dawned, that  his lorry had stopped in  a traffic-jam at  a boulevard  intersection  and that right near  him stood  a metal man on  a plinth, his  head inclined slightly forward, staring blankly down the street.      Strange  thoughts  assailed the poet, who was beginning to  feel ill. ' Now  there's an example of pure  luck .'--Ryukhin stood  up  on  the lorry's platform and raised  his fist in an inexplicable urge to attack the harmless cast-iron man--'. . .  everything he did in life,  whatever happened to him, it all went his way, everything conspired  to make him famous! But what  did he  achieve?  I've  never been able to discover . . . What about that famous phrase of his that begins " A storm of  mist.  . ."? What  a load of rot! He was lucky, that's all, just lucky!  '--Ryukhin concluded venomously, feeling the lorry start to move under him--'  and just  because  that White  officer shot at him and smashed his hip, he's famous for ever . . .'      The jam was moving. Less than two minutes later the poet, now  not only ill but ageing, walked on to the Griboyedov verandah. It was nearly empty.      Ryukhin, laden  with  dish-cloths,  was  greeted  warmly  by  Archibald Archibaldovich and immediately relieved of the horrible rags. If Ryukhin had not been  so exhausted  by the  lorry-ride  and  by  his experiences  at the clinic,  he would  probably  have  enjoyed describing  everything  that  had happened  in  the hospital and  would have embellished  the story with  some invented details. But for the moment he was incapable. Although Ryukhin  was not an observant man, now, after his  agony on the lorry, for the first time be looked really hard at  the pirate and  realised that although the man was asking  questions about Bezdomny and even exclaiming ' Oh, poor fellow! ' he 
was in reality totally indifferent to Bezdomny's fate and did not feel sorry for him at  all. ' Good for him! He's right! ' thought Ryukhin with cynical, masochistic  relish and breaking  off  his  description of  the  symptoms of schizophrenia, he asked :      'Archibald Archibaldovich,  could  I possibly have a glass of vodka. . .? '      The pirate put on a sympathetic expression and whispered :      'Of course, I quite understand . . . right  away .  . .' and signalled to a waiter.      A  quarter  of an  hour later Ryukhin  was sitting in absolute solitude hunched  over  a dish  of sardines, drinking  glass  after  glass  of vodka, understanding  more  and more about  himself  and admitting  that  there was nothing in his life that he could put right--he could only try to forget.      The  poet  had wasted  his night while  others had  spent  it  enjoying themselves and now he realised that it was lost forever. He only had to lift his head up from the lamp and look at the sky to see that the night had gone beyond return. Waiters were hurriedly jerking the cloths off the tables. The cats pacing the verandah had a morning look about them. Day broke inexorably over the poet. 